* Progress
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: progress
  :END:

This section of the book will allow you to keep track of what I'm
working on at any moment, what's going well (or not) and what to expect
next. I will keep it updated frequently.

** Journal
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: journal
   :END:

*Feb 14th onwards*: introducing the concept of systems thinking.

*Feb 10th onwards*: basic monitoring added within codebase on GitHub.

*Feb 1st onwards*: preparations for Docker: setting up Linux development
environment. Also: conception of load tests.

*Jan 31st*: Client chapters ready for review and feedback.

*Jan 28th to Jan 30th*: Rewrite of the UI chapters on the client side.

*Jan 27th*: Rewrite of the State chapter.

*Jan 26th:* Rewrite of the Communicator chapter.

*Jan 22nd to Jan 25th:* Architectural drawing for client-side
architecture and rewrite of core namespace article.

*Jan 21th:* Proofreading of client intro.

*Jan 20th:* New introduction for the client-side chapter, including
introduction to managing and protecting application state. The text is
not proofread yet, so it hasn't made its way into the book yet, but if
you're interested, you can already read it on
**[[https://github.com/matthiasn/clojure-system-book/blob/master/manuscript/Client-Architecture.md][GitHub]].

*Jan 16th to Jan 19th:* Refactoring of the /state/ namespace. It is now
split up to have each involved namespace only handle a distinct aspect
of state management. The subscribers to state updates, such as UI
elements, do not have access to the atom that keeps the application
state any longer, instead they will only be provided with the
dereferenced state, which is immutable. Thus, the application state
cannot be erroneously mutilated from parts of the system that do not
have anything to do with managing application state. Drawings and a
rewritten client side chapter are expected soon. Only read the current
version when you want to get to know the not-so-great client code first
in order to compare it with the better version later.

*Jan 9th to Jan 15th:* Redesign of the client-side architecture
according to
*[[http://matthiasnehlsen.com/blog/2015/01/09/Hairball-Removal/][this
blog post]]*. Going well, I have so far removed pretty much all
dependencies between namespaces. Only the state namespace is still
larger than I'd want it to be. That'll be something to work on this
weekend.

** Chapter Status
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: chapter-status
   :END:

*Server Side:* I think the architecture is reasonably clean, with
dependencies between different parts of the application reduced as much
as possible. *Ready for feedback.*

*Client Side:* The client-side application has been rewritten to reflect
the changes mentioned in the new introduction. *Ready for feedback.*
